
===== PAGE 1 =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apenergy
Graph neural networks for power grid operational risk assessment under
evolving unit commitment
Yadong Zhang, Pranav M. Karve, Sankaran Mahadevan ∗
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 400 24th Avenue South, Nashville, 37212, TN, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Dataset link: https://github.com/yadong-zhang
/GNN_SCUC
Keywords:
Power grid
Uncertainty
Graph neural network
Reliability
Risk
A B S T R A C T
This article investigates the ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to identify risky conditions in a power
grid over the subsequent few hours, without explicit, high-resolution information regarding future generator
on/off status or power dispatch decisions. The GNNs are trained using supervised learning to predict the power
grid’s aggregated bus-level (either zonal or system-level) or individual branch-level state under different power
supply and demand conditions. The variability of the stochastic grid variables (wind/solar generation and load
demand), and their statistical correlations, are considered while generating the inputs for the training data.
The outputs in the training data include system-level, zonal and transmission line-level quantities of interest
(QoIs). The ground truth of QoIs are obtained by numerically solving deterministic optimization problems (e.g.,
security-constrained unit commitment) with the same inputs. The GNN predictions are used to conduct hours-
ahead, sampling-based reliability and risk assessment w.r.t. zonal and system-level (load shedding) as well as
branch-level (overloading) failure events. The proposed methodology is demonstrated for three synthetic grids
with sizes ranging from 118 to 2848 buses. Our results demonstrate that GNNs are capable of providing fast and
accurate prediction of QoIs and can be good proxies for computationally expensive optimization algorithms.
The excellent accuracy of GNN-based reliability and risk assessment suggests that GNN models can substantially
improve situational awareness by enabling quick, high-resolution reliability and risk estimation.
1. Introduction
The power grid is poised for a major transformation due to the
increasing participation of renewable energy sources (RES), plugin
devices, and flexible loads [1–3]. This paradigm shift, while pivotal
in steering towards a more sustainable and diversified energy future,
introduces substantial power supply and demand uncertainty [4–7] due
to the volatility of RES. To effectively handle this challenge, grid oper-
ators are in need of (i) advanced optimization techniques that take the
uncertainty into account [8–11], and (ii) rigorous methods for quantify-
ing the operational risk (related to reserve inadequacy, load shedding).
Advanced optimization techniques are essential in grid operational de-
cisions such as unit commitment (UC) and economic dispatch (ED) [12–
14]. On the other hand, risk quantification methods are required to
understand the risks associated with the increasing uncertainty in the
grid variables [15–18]. By accurately estimating hours-ahead risk, grid
operators can develop strategies to ensure uninterrupted power supply
at optimal costs even under volatile conditions.
Advanced optimization methods, such as, stochastic programming
[19], chance-constrained optimization [20,21], robust optimization
[22], have been developed for decision-making under uncertainty.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sankaran.mahadevan@vanderbilt.edu (S. Mahadevan).
However, they come with their own sets of challenges. For instance,
stochastic programming can only consider a small number of sce-
narios (a low-resolution representation of input uncertainty) due to
the high computational cost [23,24]; chance-constrained optimization
seeks a solution that satisfies all probabilistic constraints, which is
difficult to compute in practice [25]; robust optimization considers
the worst possible grid condition in decision-making process, often
leading to overly conservative solution [26]. In operational risk quan-
tification, potential contingencies of the whole system or specific zone
are often of interest [27–30]. For instance, the analysis of system-
level or zonal load shedding [31–33], reserve inadequacy [34–36],
reserve inflexibility [37], insufficient ramp capacity [38,39], has been
reported in previous work. By focusing on the system or zone level,
the corresponding risk assessment provides a macroscopic view of the
grid’s operational state. It enables operators to identify vulnerabilities,
allocate resources more effectively, and develop strategies that enhance
the overall stability and safety of the power grid. The zonal/system-
level risk assessment requires computing the probability distribution
of grid states corresponding to the given (forecast) joint probability
distribution of the stochastic grid variables (wind/solar generation and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.124793
Received 24 May 2024; Received in revised form 24 September 2024; Accepted 24 October 2024
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
Available online 30 November 2024 
0306-2619/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Nomenclature
 Graph
 Set of edges in a graph
 Set of nodes in a graph
| ⋅ | Cardinality of a set
𝑢 Node in a graph
𝐡𝑘
𝑢 Embedding of node 𝑢 in 𝑘-th layer
𝐦𝑢 Aggregated node embedding from neighbors of 𝑢
 (𝑢) Set of 1-hop neighbors of node 𝑢
𝑁𝐺 Number of generators
𝑁 Number of samples
𝑀 Number of marginal distributions
𝑄 Number of branches in a power grid
𝑇 Number of time steps in the reliability unit
commitment horizon
𝛥𝑇 Number of time steps in the multi-step reliability
and risk assessment
𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 Generator 𝑖 ON (1)–OFF (0) status at 𝑡
𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡 Power generation of generator 𝑖 at 𝑡
𝑅𝐺𝑖,𝑡 Power generation cost of generator 𝑖 at 𝑡
𝑆 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 Startup cost of generator 𝑖 at 𝑡
𝑆 𝐷𝐺𝑖,𝑡 Shutdown cost of generator 𝑖 at 𝑡
𝜖 Random matrix following standard Gaussian  (0, 1),
R𝑁×𝑀
𝐱𝑡 Random matrix following Gaussian  (0, 𝑡), R𝑁×𝑀
𝐱𝑐
𝑡 Random matrix with covariance between columns
specified by 𝐂, R𝑁×𝑀
𝐮𝑡 CDF of 𝐱𝑐
𝑡 , [0, 1]𝑁×𝑀
𝑖 𝑖-th marginal distribution
𝐂 Covariance matrix, R𝑀×𝑀
𝐋 Lower triangular matrix of Cholesky factorization of
𝐂, R𝑀×𝑀
𝛷 CDF of standard normal probability distribution
𝛷𝑖 CDF of the 𝑖-th marginal distribution
𝛹𝑡 Indicator variable {0, 1} for load shedding at time 𝑡
𝜓(𝑡) The amount of load shed at time 𝑡 (in MW)
𝐶𝑠(𝜓) Consequence cost function for load shedding
𝛤 𝑖
𝑡 Indicator variable {0, 1} for branch 𝑖 overloading at 𝑡
𝛾 Power flow in a transmission line (network branch)
𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥 Maximum allowed branch power flow
𝜖 Fraction of 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥 that defines the security threshold of
branch power flow
̃ 𝛾 The amount of branch overloading, ̃ 𝛾= 𝛾 − 𝜖 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐶𝑜(̃ 𝛾) Consequence cost function for branch overloading
load). This is accomplished by drawing Monte Carlo (MC) samples
of stochastic grid variables from the forecast distribution and solving
deterministic SCUC problems to obtain the grid state (generator on/off
status and power dispatch) for each MC sample. This process, however,
is time consuming due to the computational cost of solving numerous
optimization problems. The granularity afforded by SCUC solution
(bus-level grid states) is also not needed for zonal/system-level risk
analysis, because such risk assessment is performed using quantities
aggregated over a power grid zone or over an entire power grid.
For example, the risk of zonal reserve shortage requires aggregating
available reserve over a zone in the power grid, and then comparing
the aggregated zonal reserve with the zonal reserve requirement. The
distribution of the available reserve across different generators within
the zone is not considered in zonal risk assessment. It is therefore
important to develop computational tools that can directly predict
zonal/system-level quantities (without solving the SCUC problem) and
thus enable fast and accurate reliability and risk assessment [40,41].
Such tools need to predict the grid state corresponding to numerous
future (hours-ahead) forecast scenarios of the stochastic grid vari-
ables, while accounting for the corresponding changes in the unit
commitment and without explicitly solving the stochastic optimization
problems. They also need to be aware of and to account for the
intricate interdependencies within the power grid with evolving unit
commitment, while providing accurate and rapid future grid state
predictions [42,43].
Fast and accurate prediction of future grid behavior under differ-
ent forecast scenarios requires learning the patterns of grid behavior
under different conditions. Neural networks, particularly graph neural
networks (GNNs), emerge as attractive options for this task due to their
superior ability to handle graph-structured information, like that en-
countered in power grid analysis [44–46]. The core principle of GNN is
to learn nodal features within a graph by assimilating information from
neighboring nodes via message passing [47,48]. This unique capability
has led to GNNs being used in various fields, including recommender
system [49], social network analysis [50], knowledge graph comple-
tion [51]. In the power grid domain, GNN has been used for fault
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
diagnosis [52], power outage prediction [53], line flow control [54],
load or generation forecasting [55], and grid state estimation [56–58].
In recent work [59,60], GNN has also been used as a surrogate for
optimal power flow (OPF) computation with a fixed (known) gener-
ator on/off status (UC). However, to the best of our knowledge, the
utilization of GNNs in performing prediction of system-, zone- and
branch-level quantities within a planning horizon (e.g., 12 h) under
changing unit commitment has not been previously reported. Such
predictions are necessary for performing hours-ahead risk assessment.
These predictions need to account for future operator actions corre-
sponding to the given probabilistic forecast. For example, if the forecast
shows higher than expected load demand, then the zonal/system-
level grid variables need to be predicted by anticipating the operator
bringing more generators online to help with increasing demand. If the
future operator actions and changes in the unit commitment are not
considered, then the risk assessment will be inaccurate.
In this work, we focus on hours-ahead prediction of quantities of
interest (QoIs) at system, zone and branch levels. Accurate GNN-based
system-level, zone-level or branch-level reliability and risk prediction
will help operators tune their intra-day reliability unit commitments
(RUCs) [61–66]. At the system/zone level, we consider thermal power
generation and load shedding as QoIs, while transmission line flow is
considered as the QoI at the branch level. Multiple GNN models are
trained with each focusing on the prediction of one QoI. In power grids,
fluctuation of grid variables in one zone is often related to the changes
in other zones, leading to spatial correlation. Temporal correlations also
emerge due to grid inertia and sequential nature of grid operations.
These correlations must be meticulously accounted for in reliability and
risk assessment. For that purpose, a large number of spatio-temporally
correlated samples are drawn from probability distribution forecasting
of the RES power supply and load demand. These samples are then
used to solve SCUC problems and to obtain the grid state and QoIs
corresponding to these forecast scenarios. Following the supervised
learning approach, the data, i.e., samples of power supply and demand
(inputs) and the corresponding QoIs (outputs), are split into training
and testing sets, and model evaluation is performed on the testing set.
The GNN-based QoI predictions are then used for reliability and risk
quantification, and the results are compared with reliability and risk
computed using numerical SCUC solutions, to evaluate the accuracy.
Our main contributions include:
1. Investigation of GNN models’ utility to predict QoIs at
system/zone/branch level under changing unit commitment. This
is the first investigation aimed at assessing the utility of GNNs for
hours-ahead grid state prediction, which implicitly considers and
accounts for the changing unit commitment but does not explicitly
compute future commitment or dispatch decisions.
2. Development of novel reliability and risk quantification methods
for hours-ahead operational risk assessment, either standalone (at a
given future time instant) or multi-step (over multiple future time in-
stants). The developed methods can be applied at both system/zone
and branch levels. This is the first investigation that considers these
two important temporal aspects of hours-ahead grid risk quantifica-
tion.
3. Development of a methodology for quantifying the influence of
congestion and insufficient generation capacity (online generators)
on load shedding risk. Such cause-aware risk quantification can help
improve the operators’ situational awareness and help illuminate
various risk trade-offs.
4. Demonstration of the proposed methodology on medium to large
sized synthetic power grids. A methodology for generating spatio-
temporally correlated samples of grid variables (synthetic forecasts)
is developed and exercised for risk assessment of medium/large
power grids.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a
brief overview of hours-ahead operational decision-making in a power
grid, fundamentals of graph neural network, and reliability and risk as-
sessment metrics. In Section 3, we discuss the elements of the proposed
methodology, including GNN model development, risk quantification,
and training data generation. Numerical experiments used to demon-
strate the proposed methodology are described in Section 4, results are
discussed in Section 5, and conclusions are provided in Section 6.
2. Background
2.1. Power grid operation and the SCUC problem
The basic requirement of grid operation is to balance demand and
supply, while minimizing the overall power generation cost [67,68].
The power demand fluctuates over a day; for example, power consump-
tion increases during the morning and early evening hours, and is very
low during the night. An operational strategy that aims to minimize the
power generation cost requires deciding the on/off status of various
generators over the operational time window, such as, a single day.
Grid operators usually schedule the on/off status of generation units
for a certain period (e.g., 12 h) by employing the hours-ahead planning
techniques such as security-constrained unit commitment (SCUC). The
SCUC problem can be stated as:
min
𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡
𝐹
(
𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 , 𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡
)
= min
𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
𝑁𝐺∑
𝑖=1
[𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 (1 − 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡−1 )𝑆 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡
+ 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡−1 (1 − 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 )𝑆 𝐷𝐺𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑈𝐺𝑖,𝑡 𝑅𝐺𝑖,𝑡 (𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡 )] (1)
subject to constraints (system power balance, power generation limits,
minimum on/off time constraints, ramping rate constraints, reserve re-
quirements, line flow limits). We refer the reader to [69] for additional
details of the SCUC problem.
Given the forecast of demand and supply, the outcome of SCUC
plays a fundamental role in subsequent grid operation. For instance,
due to its strategically important position in the operational framework,
SCUC directly influences the economic dispatch (ED), which aims at
refining the generation output every five to ten minutes [21,70]. A
rigorous hours-ahead or intra-day grid risk assessment methodology
needs to consider the evolving on/off status of the generators in re-
sponse to the changing grid state. When sampling-based operational
risk assessment methods are used, this necessitates solving thousands
of SCUC problems corresponding to the forecast scenarios. Although
various advanced algorithms (branch-and-bound [71], Lagrangian re-
laxation [72], Benders decomposition [73]) have been developed for
solving the SCUC problem, this task is still computationally challenging,
especially for large power grids with thousands of buses and branches.
To address this challenge, data-driven surrogate models are being
developed in the literature. These models can be categorized into two
types: end-to-end and assistant models. End-to-end models, including
decision tree [74], gated recurrent neural network [75], are trained to
generate direct predictions of UC or ED given demand and RES power
generation as input. These models are capable of predicting thousands
of QoIs corresponding to various demand/supply scenarios in a short
time (typically in milliseconds). However, the presence of both discrete
and continuous variables poses considerable challenge to the accuracy
these models. Moreover, most of the existing end-to-end models can
only predict 2 to 5 h ahead [76,77], while intra-day or day-ahead
grid operation usually requires a longer scheduling horizon, e.g., 12 h.
These limit the utilization of currently available end-to-end models. In
contrast, the assistant models speed up a particular subtask in the SCUC
solution process, such as identifying the active constraints [74] (critical
branches that probably exceed line flow limit [78], generators that may
approach the maximum generation capacity [79]), or providing a better
initial guess (warm start) [80,81], given the (forecasting) distribution
of demand and RES power supply. The active constraints are retained
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
during the SCUC problem solution process, whereas inactive constraints
are removed to decrease the computational cost. A warm start also
helps reduce the computational cost of the SCUC solution. Nevertheless,
the speed up is limited as the iterative SCUC problem solution is still
needed when using an assistant model.
In real-world grid operation, operators are often interested in risk
quantification of the entire power grid or specific zones [27,29,30].
For this purpose, a machine learning model that can directly predict
system-level/zonal quantities, without requiring explicit SCUC problem
solutions, could be very useful. This approach has not been reported
in the literature. The objective of this paper is to investigate the
performance of such (end-to-end) graph neural networks for direct
zonal/system-level risk estimation.
2.2. Graph neural network (GNN)
Graph neural network (GNN) is a type of neural network that can
process graph-structured data [46,82,83]. The core of GNN is message
passing mechanism, which systematically aggregates and updates node
features by assimilating information from the neighboring nodes [47,
48]. Within the topology of a graph, nodes directly linked to a given
node are designated as its one-hop neighbors. Extending this nomencla-
ture, the immediate neighbors of these one-hop nodes are identified as
two-hop neighbors, and so on. Each layer of a GNN model is dedicated to
orchestrating the exchange of information between a node and its one-
hop neighbors, and multiple layers can be stacked together to assimilate
information from remote neighbors in the graph. Message passing is
comprised of aggregation and updating, which can be represented as:
𝐦𝑢 = 𝐀𝐆𝐆𝐑𝐄𝐆𝐀𝐓𝐄(𝐡𝑘
𝑣), 𝑣 ∈  (𝑢), (2)
𝐡(𝑘+1)
𝑢 = 𝐔𝐏𝐃𝐀𝐓𝐄(𝐡𝑢, 𝐦𝑢). (3)
GNNs have been remarkably successful in recommender systems
[49], knowledge graph completion [51], social network analyses
(anomaly detection and community identification) [50]. Over the past
few years, GNN has also been used in the power grid domain. For
example, one of the earliest GNN benchmarks, graph convolutional
network (GCN) [84], has been used in power grid applications for fault
detection [85], outage prediction [86]. However, GCN needs to access
the entire graph in every aggregation and update operation, which
is computationally expensive and hinders its use for large graphs. To
alleviate the computational burden, GNN architectures that can work
on partial graphs have been developed. One such GNN architecture
is GraphSAGE [87]. It generates embeddings by sampling a fixed-size
neighborhood and then aggregating the features from these neighbors.
GraphSAGE can be represented as:
𝐦𝑢 = CONCAT
(
𝐡𝑢, 1
| (𝑢)|
∑
𝑣∈ (𝑢)
𝐡𝑣
)
. (4)
GraphSAGE does not require the entire graph to be loaded into the
computer memory. It gradually samples nodes over the graph, making
it attractive for the learning task on large graphs. In this work, we
explore GraphSAGE’s utility for learning the grid behavior pattern
over a few hours into the future, for large grids (thousands of buses).
Unless otherwise specified, the term GNN implies the GraphSAGE
architecture in the rest article. Note that a systematic investigation of
hyper-parameters, including number of layers, embedding dimensions,
learning rate, and many others, is required to make a fair comparison
between GCN and GraphSAGE w.r.t. efficiency and prediction accu-
racy [88]. We used the GraphSAGE architecture to perform the learning
task of interest. Other GNN architectures could also be used for learning
grid behavior under supply/demand uncertainty.
2.3. Reliability and risk in the power grid operation — methods and metrics
In recent years, there has been a push to shift power grid op-
erational decision-making from experience- or judgement-based best
practices (e.g., minimum reserve requirement) to advanced algorithms
(e.g., stochastic dynamic reserve allocation [23], stochastic SCUC/SCED
[24], and robust unit commitment [25]) that are able to consider
variability in supply and demand. These algorithms have allowed
decision-making under increasing supply/demand volatility due to the
increasing penetration of renewable energy. However, these methods
are computationally demanding, and it may be possible to use only
a small number of supply/demand scenarios in practice. As a result,
these methods provide an approximate estimate of the underlying
risk associated with decision-making. Furthermore, these algorithms
do not typically report on all relevant failure modes of interest for
a grid operator. For example, the risk of insufficient zonal reserve
may not be independently quantified and communicated when the
conditional value at risk (CVaR) of total generation explicitly consider
consequence cost for all relevant failure events. Such risk compu-
tation can significantly improve operators’ situational awareness for
given supply/demand forecasting, and thus help arrive at suitable
risk-mitigation interventions. For instance, it can support the cost
vs. risk trade-off analysis and help arrive at suitable risk-mitigation
interventions, such as purchasing additional power, shedding load of
a specific zone. It can also provide a quantitative basis for tuning
the hyper-parameters (penalties, constraints, number of samples) of
intra-day decision making algorithms (e.g., look-ahead commitment,
or LAC).
In a recent work [18], Stover et al. provide a comprehensive review
of state-of-the-art reliability and risk quantification methods, and pro-
pose a new sampling-based framework that encompasses various failure
modes. This framework develops metrics at three levels to characterize
the risk: the conditional expectation of the failure event (Level 1),
the probability of this event occurring (Level 2), and the consequence
(monetary cost) (Level 3). In this study, we place emphasis on the Level
2 and Level 3 metrics. The Level 2 metric captures the probability of
failure with respect to a failure mode, e.g., reserve inadequacy, loss of
load. The Level 3 metric adopts a more holistic view, not only gauging
the likelihood of failure but also factoring in the economic implications
or consequence costs linked to the adverse event. This dual consider-
ation ensures a comprehensive understanding of the operational risk,
melding both the probabilistic and economic dimensions of potential
system failures.
However, the above framework only considers reliability and risk
metrics at system level, while risk in individual branches is not quan-
tified. In the context of increasing utilization of renewable energy,
the volatility of transmission line flow is also significantly elevated,
introducing additional risk in grid operation. As a result, it is also
necessary to take this kind of risk into consideration. In this work, we
utilize the risk framework in [18] for hours-ahead zonal/system-level
reliability and risk prediction under temporally evolving grid topology
(i.e., unit commitments), and extend the analysis to branch-level QoIs.
3. Proposed methodology
Three key elements of the proposed methodology, namely, GNN
model development, reliability and risk assessment, and training data
generation, are discussed in this section.
3.1. GNN model development
In this work, we utilize GNN models consisting of three compo-
nents: Encoder, GNN layers, and Decoder. Encoder generates a high-
dimensional representation (embedding) of the input vector, i.e., node
features. This embedding acts as an enriched representation of the
input data, capturing intricate patterns and relationships inherent in
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 1. Illustration of GNN surrogate models. Vectors 𝐏, 𝐒 and 𝐅 contain predictions of zonal/system-level aggregated thermal power generation, load shedding and power flow
on critical branches, respectively, with each element of the vector representing the corresponding QoI at individual zone/branch.
Table 1
Details of GNN surrogate models.
Layer Dimension (in_channel, out_channel)
Model I Model II Model III
Encoder-1 (𝐷𝐼 , 2𝐷𝐼 ) (𝐷𝐼 , 2𝐷𝐼 ) (𝐷𝐼 , 2𝐷𝐼 )
Encoder-2 (2𝐷𝐼 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (2𝐷𝐼 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (2𝐷𝐼 , 𝐷′
𝐻 )
GraphSAGE-1 (𝐷𝐻 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (𝐷𝐻 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (𝐷′
𝐻 , 𝐷′
𝐻 )
GraphSAGE-2 (𝐷𝐻 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (𝐷𝐻 , 𝐷𝐻 ) (𝐷′
𝐻 , 𝐷′
𝐻 )
Decoder-1 (𝐷𝐻 , 2𝑇 ) (𝐷𝐻 , 2𝑇 ) (𝐷′
𝐻 , 2𝑇 )
Decoder-2 (2𝑇 , 𝑇 ) (2𝑇 , 𝑇 ) (2𝑇 , 𝑇 )
Mean Pooling (𝑇 , 𝑇 ) (𝑇 , 𝑇 ) N/A
the input. Once the encoder processes the input, it is passed on to the
GNN layers, which aggregate and update node representations by in-
corporating information from neighboring nodes, allowing the network
to understand the broader structure and context of the graph. Such
aggregation aids in refining the node embedding by assimilating both
local and global information from the graph. Note that the number
of GNN layers can be different for other problems and/or prediction
tasks [89]; systematic hyper-parameter tuning should be conducted to
determine the optimal number of layers. Finally, the Decoder takes
these enhanced node representations and translates them into the de-
sired output format. Depending on the specific application, the decoder
might reconstruct the original data, predict certain properties of the
graph, or even generate new graph structures.
The combination of Encoder, GNN layers, and Decoder ensures that
the GNN model can efficiently capture, process, and utilize graph-
structured data. Note that both Encoder and Decoder consist of two
fully connected neural layers (multi-layer perceptron, or MLP). Park
et al. [63] have shown that the expressive power of GNN models can
be improved by adding encoder and decoder. In the preliminary hyper-
parameter tuning exercise, it was found that predicting each QoI type
(e.g., thermal power generation, load shedding, power flow) separately
achieves better prediction accuracy. Therefore, three separate GNN
models are constructed for predicting different QoIs: (i) zonal/system-
level aggregated thermal power generation, (ii) zonal/system-level ag-
gregated load shedding, and (iii) power flow in critical branches.
The GNN models are schematically shown in Fig. 1, and the model
architecture details are summarized in Table 1. GNN models accept two
inputs: node vectors (Input 1 in Fig. 1) and adjacency matrix (Input 2
in Fig. 1). For the 𝑖-th node, the node vector 𝐱𝑖 is a concatenation of the
feature vector 𝐮 and grid variable vector 𝐯, i.e., 𝐱𝑖 = 𝐮 ∥ 𝐯. For a node
representing a generator bus, 𝐮 = 𝐮𝑔 = [location-𝑥, location-𝑦, zone,
voltage, max power generation, min power generation, on/off status,
marginal price]; for a node representing a load bus, 𝐮 = 𝐮𝑑 = [location-
𝑥, location-𝑦, zone, voltage, demand]; for a node representing a bus
which contains both generator and load bus, 𝐮 = 𝐮𝑔 ∥ 𝐮𝑑. 𝑇 represents
the number of time steps and also the dimension of the grid variable
vector 𝐯. For generator, 𝐯 = 𝐯𝑔 = [𝑝1, 𝑝2, … , 𝑝𝑇 ] where 𝑝𝑖 represents the
wind power generation at time step 𝑖. Note that 𝑝𝑖 is initialized with 0
for a thermal generator. The initial value for the binary on/off status
variable is set as 0.5 for thermal generators, whereas it is enforced at
1 for wind turbines. For load bus, 𝐯 = 𝐯𝑑 = [𝑙1, 𝑙2, … , 𝑙𝑇 ] where 𝑙𝑖
represents the demand at time step 𝑖. The dimension of 𝐱𝑖 is represented
by 𝐷𝐼, other embedding dimensions can be determined by 𝐷𝐻 = 2𝐷𝐼
and 𝐷′
𝐻 = 4𝐷𝐼. Note that the three types of nodes are embedded
separately. The adjacency matrix (Input 2) represents the topology
(node connection) of power grid. Since there are three node types,
heterogeneous GNN is used to perform aggregation and update. All
transmission lines are modeled as edges of the graph. A ReLU activation
function is added after each neural network layer except for the last
one. These GNN models take grid topology, load demand and RES
power generation as inputs, and generate predictions of the QoIs. A
supervised learning approach is used, and decisions obtained using
numerical solutions of the SCUC problem are used as outputs (reference
solution of QoIs) in the training process. The loss function consists of
mean squared error (MSE) and a regularization term to ensure that
predictions are within reasonable upper and lower bounds.
3.2. Reliability and risk assessment
We consider two failure modes for reliability and risk assessment:
load shedding and branch overloading. Load shedding refers to the delib-
erate reduction or shutdown of electrical power supply to a consumer
in a system to prevent the failure of the entire system, when demand
strains the capacity of the system. Branch overloading implies that the
electric current on a branch exceeds a safety threshold and may lead
to failure. We perform two types of hours-ahead reliability and risk
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
assessment: (a) standalone hours-ahead assessment that considers QoIs
at a specific future time instant (𝑡 + 𝑖), and (b) multi-step hours-ahead
assessment that considers QoIs at multiple time instants ((𝑡 + 𝑖), (𝑡 + 𝑖) +
1, (𝑡+𝑖) + 2, … ) in order to provide an aggregated estimate over a future
duration. We use the variable 𝛥𝑇 to distinguish the reliability and risk
aggregation horizon from the RUC planning horizon 𝑇 .
3.2.1. Load shedding
Both standalone and multi-step load shedding are considered in the
load shedding analysis. Standalone shedding represents the immediate
vulnerability within the system, highlighting areas where current de-
mand exceeds the system’s capacity or where there are breakdowns at
a particular time instant. On the other hand, the multi-step shedding
is a forward-looking measure that identifies potential pitfalls of the
grid operation over multiple time instants in the near future. This
dual perspective establishes a comprehensive assessment of the system’s
reliability that can account for both current and future challenges. The
probabilities of standalone and multi-step load shedding are defined as:
standalone:
𝑠(𝑡) = 𝑝(𝛹𝑡 = 1), (5)
multi-step:
 +
𝑠 (𝑡) = 𝑝
( 𝑡+𝛥𝑇⋃
𝑡′=𝑡+1
𝛹𝑡′ = 1 | 𝛹𝑡 = 1
)
, (6)
respectively.
Load shedding usually leads to compromised service reliability,
potential economic losses, and safety concerns, hence there is con-
sequence (monetary cost) associated with it. In [18], the degree of
shedding is considered and the corresponding cost is defined as:
𝑅𝑠(𝑡) = ∫
𝜓(𝑡)
0
𝐶𝑠(𝜓) 𝑑 𝜓 , (7)
Note that 𝐶𝑠(𝜓) depends solely on 𝜓, while 𝜓(𝑡) is a function of 𝑡. 𝑅𝑠(𝑡)
can be computed for each sample of grid variables (obtained from their
forecast). The associated risk of load shedding is then quantified as the
expectation of potential monetary cost (over all samples):
𝑠(𝑡) = E [𝑅𝑠(𝑡)], (8)
and
+
𝑠 (𝑡) =
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=1
E [𝑅𝑠(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)], (9)
for standalone and multi-step load shedding, respectively. Here, we
assume that the cost function 𝐶𝑠(𝜓) is temporally invariant. Neverthe-
less, the consequence cost for load shedding events further away from
the current time could be reduced by considering suitable, temporally
diminishing cost functions, e.g., by using a discount factor 1∕(1 + 𝛥𝑡) to
modify 𝐶𝑠(𝜓). The overall risk at 𝑡 can be computed as:
ℜ𝑠(𝑡) = 𝑠(𝑡) + +
𝑠 (𝑡)
= E [𝑅𝑠(𝑡)]+
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=1
E [𝑅𝑠(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)] (10)
=
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=0
E [𝑅𝑠(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)]
3.2.2. Branch overloading
Branch overloading can result in a large amount of heat generation
that may weaken the insulating material, accelerate the aging process
of the conductor, and even lead to equipment failure. Hence it is vital
to monitor and manage branch loading status. Once again, we consider
both standalone and multi-step risk. The respective probabilities are
calculated as:
standalone:
 𝐼
𝑜 (𝑡) = 𝑝 (𝛤𝑡 = 1), (11)
multi-step:
 𝐼+
𝑜 (𝑡) = 𝑝
( 𝑡+𝛥𝑇⋃
𝑡′=𝑡+1
𝛤𝑡′ = 1 | 𝛤𝑡 = 1
)
, (12)
In real-world grid operations, electric current through any given
branch is influenced by the flows in other branches. This interdepen-
dence is due to the physical laws that govern electrical flow (Kirchhoff’s
laws). Therefore, we compute conditional probabilities (of one branch
overloading given overloading in other branches) for both standalone
and multi-step cases. The corresponding probabilities are computed as:
standalone (conditional):
 𝐼 𝐼
𝑜 (𝑡)|||𝑖,𝑗
=
[
𝑝
(
𝛤 𝑗
𝑡 = 1 | 𝛤 𝑖
𝑡 = 1
)]
𝑖,𝑗
, (13)
multi-step (conditional):
 𝐼 𝐼+
𝑜 (𝑡)|||𝑡′,𝑖,𝑗
=
[
𝑝
( 𝑡+𝛥𝑇⋃
𝑡′=𝑡+1
𝛤 𝑗
𝑡′ = 1 | 𝛤 𝑖
𝑡 = 1
)]
𝑡′,𝑖,𝑗
. (14)
If a transmission line is experiencing overloading at timestep 𝑖, then
the grid operators may try to dispatch power to divert the flow to
other areas of the grid. This may lead to other branches experiencing
overloading at future timestep 𝑖 + 𝑛. Furthermore, overloading of a
transmission line may also indicate high demand in a power grid zone,
and this could also be a precursor or indicator of high demand in
another zone, leading to overloading of the transmission line in that
zone. The conditional probability is a meaningful statistical quantity
that captures interdependence of the complex power flow in the grid for
a given forecast of stochastic grid variables. Note that the conditional
probability computation does not make any restrictive assumptions
about parameters/capacities/properties/locations of transmission lines
being considered. We simply use the knowledge of future grid behavior,
learned by our GNN surrogate, to predict the conditional probability of
a branch overloading when another branch is experiencing high power
flow.
The consequence of branch overloading, also with consideration of
the degree of overloading, is defined as:
𝑅𝑜(𝑡) = max
{
∫
̃ 𝛾(𝑡)
0
𝐶𝑜(̃ 𝛾) 𝑑 ̃ 𝛾 , 0
}
. (15)
The risk of standalone and multi-step load shedding can be computed
as:
𝐼
𝑜 (𝑡) =
𝑄∑
𝑖=1
E [𝑅𝑜(𝑡)]
𝑖 , (16)
𝐼+
𝑜 (𝑡) =
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=1
𝑄∑
𝑖=1
E [𝑅𝑜(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)]
𝑖 , (17)
and the overall risk can be obtained as:
ℜ𝑜(𝑡) = 𝐼
𝑜 (𝑡) + 𝐼+
𝑜 (𝑡)
=
𝑄∑
𝑖=1
E [𝑅𝑜(𝑡)]
𝑖 +
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=1
𝑄∑
𝑖=1
E [𝑅𝑜(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)]
𝑖 (18)
=
𝛥𝑇∑
𝛥𝑡=0
𝑄∑
𝑖=1
E [𝑅𝑜(𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡)]
𝑖
Following the definition of risk, Eq. (18) considers branch overloading
risk for all transmission lines for the current (standalone) and future
(multi-step) time horizons. Conditional probabilities are not used
in risk computation, however, they could be useful for operators to
explore the dependence between different transmission lines, and thus
help arrive at more suitable risk-mitigation interventions to deal with
branch overloading. The conditional probabilities are reported and the
accuracy of GNN model-based conditional probability quantification is
evaluated in this work.
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
3.3. Training data generation
Demonstration of the proposed methodology requires probabilistic
forecasts for the grid. Since such forecasts are typically not available
for synthetic power grids, we develop a method here for generating
synthetic forecasts. We utilize an autoregressive model to account
for temporal correlations for a given grid variable over the future
time steps of interest. The spatial dependency between different grid
variables is considered by specifying a covariance matrix. By incorpo-
rating both temporal and spatial correlation, our methodology offers
a robust framework for a nuanced simulation of grid dynamics, which
is valuable in demonstrating the utility of probabilistic grid behavior
analysis methods. Given a planning horizon (time steps) 𝑇 and marginal
probability distributions 𝑖 (𝑖 ∈ 1, 2, … 𝑀) of grid variables, the
procedure for generating 𝑁 spatio-temporally correlated training data
samples for all time steps is shown in Algorithm 1. Note that this is to
generate synthetic data that can mimic realistic power grid operation
conditions only. In practice, however, GNN surrogate can be trained
using historical data.
Algorithm 1 Sampling spatio-temporally correlated stochastic grid
variables
Inputs: #samples 𝑁, #time steps 𝑇 , marginals 1, 2, ..., 𝑀,
covariance matrix 𝐂 ∈ R𝑀×𝑀
Start
do: 𝐋 ← 𝐂 = 𝐋𝐋𝑇 ⊳ Cholesky factorization of covariance matrix
𝐱0 ← 𝟎 ∈ R𝑁×𝑀 ⊳ Initialization
for t = 1:T do:
𝐱𝑡 ← 𝐱𝑡−1 + 𝜖 , 𝜖 ∼  (0, 1) ⊳ Random walk
Markov chain
𝐬𝑡 ← 𝐱𝑡∕
√
𝑡 ⊳ Obtain uncorrelated standard normal random
variables
𝐱𝑐
𝑡 ← (𝐋𝐬′
𝑡
)′ ⊳ Obtain correlated normal random
variables
𝐮𝑡 ← 𝛷 (𝐱𝑐
𝑡
) ⊳ Compute CDF of correlated normal random
variables
End for
for t = 1:𝑇 do:
for i = 1:M do:
𝐰𝑖
𝑡 ← 𝛷−1
𝑖
(𝐮𝑖
𝑡
), 𝐮𝑖
𝑡 ∈ R𝑁 ⊳ Draw correlated samples from
specified marginal PDFs
End for
End
Outputs: 𝐖𝑡 = [𝐰1
𝑡 𝐰2
𝑡 … 𝐰𝑀
𝑡 ] consisting of stochastic variables with
correlations specified by 𝐂. (The 𝑁 variables in the same column are
from the same marginal probability distribution).
We also develop a methodology to generate load shedding cause-
aware training data to train GNN models that could identify the cause
of (future) load shedding. Specifically, we differentiate between load
shedding due to : (a) insufficient number of online generators, and
(b) network congestion. If the maximum power output from the set of
online generators cannot satisfy the minimum reserve requirement, and
new generators cannot be quickly brought online due to ramp-up con-
straints, then the SCUC optimizer may shed load to satisfy the minimum
reserve requirement. This type of load shedding, caused by insufficient
number of generators being online, is determined while computing
(deciding) the generator on/off schedule. On the other hand, congestion
refers to the physical limits of power transmission and distribution
infrastructure represented using security constraints in decision-making
algorithms. These security constraints could be violated due to outdated
equipment, maintenance issues, or bottlenecks in certain parts of the
grid. Even if an adequate number of generators are online, power
cannot be effectively distributed to all areas if the security constraints
are being violated. This leads to targeted load shedding to prevent
equipment overload. When predicting future load shedding, it is of
interest to the operator to know the cause of the problem (congestion
or non-congestion related). This will allow the operator to implement
a suitable problem-specific mitigation strategy.
To distinguish the two causes, we propose to compute dispatch for a
given RES and demand forecast under two set-ups: (1) generator on/off
status (UC) is a decision variable, and (2) UC is fixed according to the
optimal solution in step (1). In the first computation, both UC related
constraints (e.g., generator ramp up/down and minimum/maximum
online time constraints) and other security constraints have influence
on dispatch decision, and thus impact load shedding. The algorithm
may recommend to shed load if sufficient number of generators could
not be brought online to satisfy power balance/reserve requirements or
power generated by online generators could not be securely delivered
to satisfy demand. This is load shedding due to congestion + non-
congestion related reasons. In the second computation, the power
generation capacity is pre-determined (the number of online generators
is fixed), as a result, load shedding under this circumstance is only
caused by security constraints, i.e., congestion related load shedding.
Non-congestion related load shedding can then be obtained by sub-
tracting the latter from the former. The implementation of the proposed
load shedding cause-aware analysis is illustrated in Fig. 2.
4. Numerical experiments
We illustrate the utility of the GNN models using numerical
experiments conducted on three synthetic grids: Case118 [90],
Case1354pegase [91] and Case2848rte [92]. About 20% generators in
each of the synthetic grids are taken to be RES generation units. The
grids are partitioned into three, eight and sixteen zones, respectively.
We highlight the following:
• Grids are partitioned based on the geographic locations of buses. The
details of zonal partitions can be found in Appendix A.
• At the beginning of the training/testing exercise, the required number
of samples are obtained from appropriate uniform distributions corre-
sponding to each zone for each power grid. These samples represent
the maximum generation capacity for thermal generators in that
zone. These capacities are recorded and kept constant throughout the
training/testing exercise.
• Wind turbines are used to represent RES generators, and wind power
will be preferably used to meet the load demand before thermal
generators are taken into consideration.
• For each zone, two random variables are considered: wind speed and
load demand. They are sampled from corresponding marginal distri-
bution. The number of random variables is thus twice of the number
of zones for a power grid. The sampled wind speed is converted to
aggregated wind power using an assumed power rating curve, and
samples of load demand are considered as the aggregated demand.
• The aggregated values are distributed to wind power generation and
demand at individual wind turbines and load buses in the same zone,
respectively, with fixed distribution factors [93].
We consider an intra-day planning horizon of 𝑇 = 12 hours for SCUC
calculation. Stochastic grid variables are sampled using Algorithm 1.
Specifically, wind speed is assumed to follow a Weibull probability
distribution (and converted to wind power) while load is described
by a truncated normal probability distribution. The Latin hypercube
sampling (LHS) technique is utilized for sampling grid variables from
the corresponding (forecast) distributions in the first time step. The
well-known power system optimal scheduling tool MATPOWER [90]
is then used to formulate the corresponding SCUC problems, which
are solved by using the state-of-the-art numerical solver Gurobi [94].
Synthetic data is generated on a Windows computer with 128 GB
memory and i9-13900K processor. It takes 0.5, 3, and 10 h to generate
SCUC solutions for 1000 samples for Case118, Case1354pegase and
Case2848rte, respectively.
The GNN models are trained using a supervised learning approach
in Python routines PyTorch [95] and PyG [96]. Inputs to the model
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 2. Separating congestion and non-congestion related load shedding. Power dispatch is computed twice: (1) violet labeled where all constraints are considered and the decision
variables include UC and generator dispatch. Load shedding is impacted by both UC and security constraints (i.e., congestion + non-congestion related shedding); (2) green labeled
where power dispatch is the only the decision variable, and the pre-computed UC solution is used (the maximum power generation capacity is determined). Load shedding depends
only on security constraints (i.e., congestion related shedding). Then non-congestion related load shedding is obtained by subtracting the latter from the former.
include wind generation and load, the grid topology and branch prop-
erties. Outputs are the corresponding system/zonal aggregated thermal
power generation and load shedding, as well as branch flow, for the
planning period (12 h). Overall, 1000 SCUC solutions are generated
for model training, validation, and testing with proportions 70%, 10%
and 20%, respectively. The loss vs number of training data suggests that
it is not necessary to use more samples in training process, as shown
in Appendix B, and similar observation has been reported in [77].
The hyper-parameters are systematically tuned using Ray Tune pack-
age [97], and we focus on three key hyper-parameters: learning rate,
embedding dimensions, and the number of GraphSAGE layers. Model
prediction accuracy is used as the evaluation metric and the optimal
combination is saved for subsequent model training. The GNN models
are trained on a computer with 128 GB Intel Core i9-13900K processor
and RTX A6000 graphical card with 48 GB memory. The convergence
is observed as there is no more improvement on training loss after
one third of the training time. The training time is 5, 7 and 7.5 h for
Case118, Case1354pegase and Case2848rte, respectively.
For the multi-step reliability and risk assessment, we consider 𝛥𝑇 =
2 hours. This means that we compute aggregated reliability and risk
over two hour-long windows starting at multiple future time instants.
For demonstration purposes, we utilize a constant cost function by
setting 𝐶𝑠 = $10∕𝑀 𝑊 and 𝐶𝑜 = $1∕𝑀 𝑊 in Eqs.  (7) and ( 15),
respectively. Note, however, that it is possible to implement any cost
function. We conduct experiments on the system and individual zones
simultaneously, while the results are evaluated separately. By doing so,
we aim at investigating the relative vulnerability of different zones and
their contributions to the entire power grid. We compute the average
loading percentage of all branches over training data. Based on the
result, all branches are ranked in a descending order and those with
average loading percentage close to or larger than 0.5 are selected.
We refer to these branches as critical branches. We focus on these
branches for branch overloading reliability and risk assessment, since
the loading percentage on the remaining branches is far below the
security threshold in > 90% operating conditions. The fraction of
branch power flow security threshold is set as 𝜖 = 85%.
5. Results
The results of the numerical experiments with the three grids are
discussed in this section. Firstly, to show that there is noticeable change
in unit commitment over the 12-hour planning period, we plot the
rate of change of generator ON/OFF status for all three grids. We then
evaluate the performance of the GNN models in predicting the QoIs,
and the results are shown in terms of mean relative error (MRE, %).
Finally, we evaluate the accuracy of reliability and risk quantification
based on the GNN predictions by comparing them with the reference
reliability and risk estimates computed based on SCUC solutions.
5.1. Evolution of thermal generator on/off status
The average change in the unit commitment (i.e., percentage of
thermal generators turned on or off) over the RUC horizon, for the
testing data points, is shown in Fig. 3. All thermal generators are online
(status: ON) at 𝑡 = 1 h and some of them are turned off at 𝑡 =
2 h, because of low anticipated load demand. Thereafter, the forecast
scenarios dictate when a generator will be turned on or off. A significant
change in thermal generator on–off status proportionately impacts
thermal power generation, branch power flow. The results in Fig. 3
demonstrate that the testing data samples show significant change in
the unit commitment over the RUC horizon. The risk quantification
results under such evolving unit commitment are of interest in this
work.
5.2. GNN model predictions
In this section, we evaluate the accuracy of the GNN model for
system-level, zone-level, and branch-level QoI predictions. The predic-
tion error for Case118 is shown in Fig. 4. The MRE of aggregated power
generation at each time step within the RUC horizon remains below
4%, indicating excellent accuracy. The MRE for system and zone II
is below 2%. In zone I and III, the MRE is slightly higher but still
maintains a good accuracy level with MRE mostly under 3%; the MRE
goes beyond 3% at two future time steps. The load shedding prediction
is also extremely accurate with the MRE less than 1% for zone I and 3%
for other zones as well as the system. In terms of the GNN prediction
for branch flow, only the results for critical branches are shown here.
It is noticed that MRE is consistently below 1% for Case118, suggesting
excellent predictive accuracy of the GNN model. The overall MREs
(average of MREs over all time steps over all zones/branches) are
summarized in Table 2.
The system-level/zonal prediction results for Case1354pegase are
summarized in Tables C.1 and C.2, and those for Case2848rte are
shown in Tables C.4 and C.5, respectively. Even for these large grids
GNN predictions exhibit good accuracy (MRE <5%) for all zones and
the system at different time steps. The branch-level prediction results
for the other two grids are shown in Tables C.3 and C.6, and GNN
prediction MRE remains below 3% for these large grids. The average of
MREs over all time steps over all zones/branches for these large grids
are also summarized in Table 2. Overall, the GNN surrogates achieve
excellent accuracy in predicting zonal/system level (aggregated) and
branch-level quantities.
On average, the numerical solver requires 12 𝑠, 78 𝑠 and 175 𝑠, re-
spectively, to solve one SCUC problem for the three grids. It only takes
the GNN model 2 × 10−4 𝑠, 10−3 𝑠 and 1.5 × 10−3 𝑠 respectively to obtain
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 3. Percentage change in unit commitment over the RUC horizon of interest (i.e., percentage of generators that change status from ‘ON to OFF’ or from ‘OFF to ON’ at each
time step).
Table 2
Mean relative error (%) over all time steps over all zones/branches.
Grid Mean relative error
Zonal/system-level Zonal/system-level Power flow on
thermal power generation load shedding critical branches
Case118 2.05 1.87 1.01
Case1354pegase 2.83 2.04 1.30
Case2848rte 2.94 2.46 1.60
Fig. 4. Mean relative error (%) of GNN prediction for Case118 QoIs. (a) Zonal/system-
level thermal power generation; (b) zonal/system-level load shedding; (c) power flow
on critical branches.
the corresponding prediction. The speed-up achieved using the GNN
surrogate model is thus capable of enabling real-time risk quantification
with adequate accuracy.
5.3. Reliability and risk predictions
In this section, we evaluate the accuracy of GNN-based reliability
and risk assessment by comparing it with SCUC-based assessment.
5.3.1. Load shedding
The probability of load shedding for Case118 is shown in Fig. 5(a).
GNN-based reliability quantification is in agreement with the numerical
SCUC solution-based quantification, for both the system and indi-
vidual zones. The probabilities of standalone total (congestion and
non-congestion-related) load shedding for zones I, II and III are around
0.1, 0.4 and 0.5, respectively, suggesting that zone II and III have
higher vulnerability than zone I. At the system level, the probability of
load shedding is around 0.5 over the planning horizon. Probabilities of
congestion and non-congestion-related load shedding are also estimated
separately and shown in Figs. 5(b) and 5(c). The GNN model shows
excellent predictive capability for cause-aware load shedding analysis.
Congestion seems to be the primary cause of load shedding, as the
corresponding load shedding probability is significantly higher than
that due to non-congestion-related factors. These results suggest that
GNN is capable of decoupling different factors that lead to the adverse
event, thus it can be a useful tool to improve the operator’s situational
awareness and enhance the system reliability. The multi-step reliability
quantification is shown in Fig. 5(d). It is seen that GNN-based reliability
calculation is very accurate (except for Zone I) and captures the trend
of load shedding probability in future two-hour-long windows starting
at each of the future hours of interest.
There is noticeable difference between GNN-based multi-step load
shedding probability and the reference solution for zone 1. We investi-
gated possible reasons for this peculiarity, including network topology,
load variability, and wind power generation in zone 1. However, we
did not observe any features that distinguish zone 1 from other zones.
When machine learning models are constructed to predict multiple
outputs, the loss function minimization is in an aggregated sense over
all the outputs, therefore it is possible that some outputs are poorly
predicted.
Not surprisingly, GNN-based risk quantification aligns well with
that from the reference (SCUC-based) solution, as shown in Fig. 6. It is
observed that the risk caused by load shedding gradually decreases over
time. This is reasonable, because operators can take corrective actions
to mitigate risk at time horizons farther away from the risk estimation
time (𝑡 = 1). We also notice that zone I is significantly less risky than
other zones, and the consequence cost almost drops to zero after 𝑇 = 8
hours. In contrast, zone II exhibits the highest risk at around $5,000,
slightly higher than that of zone III which is at $4,000. The system-level
risk caused by load shedding experiences a slight drop from around
$11,000 at 𝑡 = 1 h to $9,000 at 𝑡 = 12 h, and the trend is accurately
captured by the GNN-based risk computation.
The reliability and risk quantification of load shedding for
Case1354pegase and Case2848rte are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, re-
spectively. The percentage difference between GNN-based and SCUC-
based reliability/risk quantification for load shedding is summarized
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 5. Reliability and risk quantification for load shedding (Case118). (a) Probability of (standalone) total load shedding, (b) probability of (standalone) congestion-related load
shedding, (c) probability of (standalone) non-congestion-related load shedding, and (d) probability of (multi-step) total load shedding.
Fig. 6. Risk of load shedding (Case118).
Fig. 7. Reliability and risk quantification for load shedding (Case1354pegase). (a) Probability of standalone load shedding, (b) probability of multi-step load shedding, and (c)
risk of load shedding.
Table 3
Percentage difference between GNN-based and SCUC-based probability/risk of load shedding for Case1354pegase over all time steps (computed
using the predictions depicted in Fig. 7).
Zone Standalone probability Multi-step probability Risk
Min Mean Max Min Mean Max Min Mean Max
S 0.13 1.13 3.54 1.05 5.28 7.66 0.04 1.24 2.77
Z1 0.66 5.62 13.85 0.67 3.06 8.39 1.43 17.31 34.73
Z2 1.33 4.53 10.61 0.80 3.50 7.05 0.75 14.37 24.74
Z3 1.65 8.50 18.57 0.21 3.77 9.05 0.79 12.39 47.45
Z4 0.65 3.18 9.58 1.94 5.30 8.45 1.05 6.05 12.31
Z5 0.10 1.68 6.23 0.22 2.22 6.49 0.72 3.91 9.25
Z6 0.60 3.44 7.28 0.11 2.02 4.84 0.52 5.61 13.22
Z7 2.50 9.60 21.06 0.41 5.87 16.83 0.19 3.19 8.95
Z8 1.34 6.30 13.69 1.12 2.70 5.36 1.25 11.08 21.65
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 8. Reliability and risk quantification for load shedding (Case2848rte). (a) Probability of standalone load shedding, (b) probability of multi-step load shedding, and (c) risk of
load shedding.
Table 4
Percentage difference between GNN-based and SCUC-based probability/risk of load shedding for Case2848rte over all time steps (computed
using the predictions depicted in Fig. 8).
Zone Standalone probability Multi-step probability Risk
Min Mean Max Min Mean Max Min Mean Max
S 0.09 1.17 2.24 0.14 3.41 6.63 0.14 1.21 2.99
Z1 0.27 3.67 5.92 0.61 3.82 11.03 0.47 3.60 7.22
Z2 0.08 1.29 3.83 0.02 4.59 16.63 0.08 4.44 10.00
Z3 1.42 5.09 11.24 0.24 3.45 12.51 0.42 3.16 7.46
Z4 0.07 1.71 3.10 0.21 2.07 5.28 1.81 5.41 11.28
Z5 0.04 1.77 3.71 0.40 3.59 7.48 0.24 2.39 8.03
Z6 0.44 3.15 5.36 0.10 2.65 6.91 1.24 6.35 12.87
Z7 1.02 5.10 10.44 0.34 2.80 5.38 3.84 10.84 28.85
Z8 0.62 4.12 7.05 0.12 2.92 7.46 1.26 5.77 14.97
Z9 0.42 3.18 6.66 0.08 1.81 4.55 0.07 5.26 13.40
Z10 0.45 2.21 3.63 1.83 4.34 7.04 0.04 6.61 15.03
Z11 0.20 4.68 10.70 0.22 0.93 2.45 1.13 3.36 8.89
Z12 0.08 1.54 3.16 0.11 2.04 6.97 0.09 3.19 9.69
Z13 0.37 1.97 3.71 0.03 3.01 6.17 0.05 5.02 19.96
Z14 0.21 2.19 4.50 0.20 2.38 8.50 0.11 5.14 11.09
Z15 0.16 5.97 11.00 0.19 3.12 7.09 1.01 3.18 8.19
Z16 0.59 3.13 7.46 0.29 3.12 6.41 0.01 6.54 12.89
in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. It can be seen that GNN-based risk
quantification is in excellent agreement with the reference (SCUC-
based) solution for individual zones as well as for the entire system.
The results suggest that GNN can be used to facilitate risk management
of large, real-world grids by speeding up the computation. Since well-
trained GNN models are able to give QoI predictions for thousands
of operational scenarios within a second, the GNN-based approach is
thus appealing for hours-ahead reliability and risk assessment and man-
agement. GNN predictions and the reference values (numerical solver
outputs) of QoIs at all time steps are also provided in Supplementary
Material.
5.3.2. Branch overloading
The probability of standalone branch overloading is shown in
Fig. 9(a). It is observed that the GNN-based analysis for the selected
(critical) branches is very accurate. We notice that the first branch is
almost always overloaded with probability near 1 at all time steps, and
the second and third branches are often overloaded with probabilities
around 0.7 and 0.6, respectively. The fourth branch is overloaded with
a probability of 0.5. The results also demonstrate that it is not necessary
to include all the branches in reliability and risk assessment, since the
overloading probability for the remaining the branches is smaller than
0.5.
The probabilities of multi-step branch overloading are shown in
Fig. 9(b). Compared with standalone overloading, the probability of
multi-step overloading for all branches is slightly elevated. In par-
ticular, the first branch is still the most vulnerable one with the
probability of overloading at 1 at all time steps. For the second and
third branch, multi-step overloading probability is elevated to 0.9
and 0.8, respectively. Overloading probability for the fourth branch
increases to around 0.7. The risk associated with branch overloading
is shown in Fig. 9(c). It is observed that the GNN-based risk quantifi-
cation is slightly conservative compared to the reference (SCUC-based)
solution (however, the error is negligibly small).
The reliability and risk quantification results of branch overloading
for Case1354pegase and Case2848rte are shown in Figs. 10 and 11,
respectively, and the results confirm the good accuracy of GNN-based
results compared to SCUC-based results (the percentage difference is
summarized in Tables 5 and 6, respectively). This demonstrates the
excellent accuracy of GNN-based risk quantification; hence the GNN
surrogate model can be a valuable tool to enable fast risk quantifica-
tion during power grid operation, thus supporting fast, risk-informed
decision-making. GNN predictions and the reference values (numer-
ical solver outputs) of QoIs at all time steps are also provided in
Supplementary Material.
For the numerical reference solution, we lowered the allowable
maximum power flow for some transmission lines to encourage some
branch overloading events. This helped generate synthetic data that
mimics the spatial variability in transmission line loading percentage.
It is possible that transmission lines with this reduced maximum power
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Fig. 9. Reliability and risk of branch overloading (Case118). (a) Probability of standalone branch overloading, (b) Probability of multi-step branch overloading, and (c) Risk of
branch overloading.
Fig. 10. Reliability and risk of branch overloading (Case1354pegase). (a) Probability of standalone branch overloading, (b) Probability of multi-step branch overloading, and (c)
Risk of branch overloading.
Fig. 11. Reliability and risk of branch overloading (Case2848rte). (a) Probability of standalone branch overloading, (b) Probability of multi-step branch overloading, and (c) Risk
of branch overloading.
flow limit are loaded beyond the threshold (85% of the maximum
power flow limit) for the twelve hour period considered in our study. In
practice, however, such transmission lines could be replaced to increase
their capacity.
6. Conclusion
We investigated the utilization of graph neural network (GNN)
as a proxy to facilitate hours-ahead decision-making in power grid
operations, while accounting for anticipated changes in the unit com-
mitment. To train the GNN model, spatio-temporally correlated samples
of stochastic variables (wind power and load demand) are drawn from
their joint probability (forecast) distribution, and the corresponding
unit commitment and dispatch solutions are obtained using an numer-
ical solver. The data (samples and numerical SCUC solutions) are used
to train the GNN models following a supervised learning approach with
stochastic grid variables (wind/solar generation and load) as inputs
and SCUC solutions as outputs. Multiple GNN models are trained to
predict different quantities of interest (QoIs), i.e., load shedding at
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Table 5
Percentage difference between GNN-based and SCUC-based probability/risk of branch overloading for Case1354pegase over all time steps
(computed using the predictions depicted in Fig. 10).
Zone Standalone probability Multi-step probability
Min Mean Max Min Mean Max
b1 0.08 1.07 2.65 0.00 0.63 5.60
b2 0.35 1.90 5.08 0.01 2.48 5.56
b3 0.22 2.09 4.02 0.18 3.54 11.80
b4 0.22 2.32 6.14 1.75 3.89 10.41
b5 0.11 1.93 5.35 0.55 3.35 8.27
b6 0.11 2.98 7.83 1.73 2.98 5.63
b7 0.29 2.99 7.04 0.12 3.73 9.55
b8 0.42 2.89 10.65 0.02 3.16 8.24
Table 6
Percentage difference between GNN-based and SCUC-based probability/risk of branch overloading for Case2848rte over all time steps (computed
using the results depicted in Fig. 11).
Zone Standalone probability Multi-step probability
Min Mean Max Min Mean Max
b1 0.00 0.34 1.70 0.37 1.87 3.99
b2 0.64 2.99 6.45 2.44 6.39 13.41
b3 0.05 2.39 6.90 0.08 2.68 5.68
b4 0.02 2.92 8.97 0.08 3.68 9.81
b5 0.03 2.49 7.03 0.06 2.64 8.08
b6 1.18 3.68 9.56 0.47 3.74 7.49
b7 0.00 2.54 6.85 0.67 3.27 6.87
b8 0.56 2.45 4.46 0.35 2.44 5.99
b9 0.08 1.67 5.98 0.06 3.05 10.31
b10 0.01 2.37 6.46 0.91 3.17 7.13
b11 0.10 2.79 5.66 1.98 6.38 13.23
b12 0.23 1.96 4.06 0.19 3.37 6.73
b13 0.04 2.98 8.98 1.03 3.61 8.78
b14 0.33 2.98 5.51 0.47 1.82 3.99
b15 0.02 3.24 8.43 1.38 5.78 13.59
b16 1.24 4.21 10.87 0.63 3.29 8.49
system/zonal level and power flow at branch level. The QoIs are then
used for reliability and risk quantification using Monte Carlo sampling.
Failure modes at system level (load shedding) and branch level (trans-
mission line overloading) are considered. The methodology employs
standalone and multi-step temporal views of failure events for hours-
ahead risk assessment, and thus provides a comprehensive evaluation
of risk associated with adverse events. The proposed GNN-based relia-
bility and risk estimation methodology was demonstrated on medium
to large realistic power grids. The excellent prediction accuracy and
low computational cost of the GNN model indicate that GNN models
can be good proxies for complicated computational tasks and fast
decision-making in power grid operation. Our results also demonstrated
that GNN models can provide accurate estimate of hours-ahead grid
operational risk.
The proposed GNN-based reliability and risk assessment method
utilizes probabilistic forecasts over the next few hours to obtain the
training data. The subsequently trained GNN proxies are only applica-
ble to the probabilistic forecasts used for generating the training data.
Future work needs to develop GNN proxies that can be generalized
to a wide range of possible forecasts. The statistical distance between
training data and out-of-distribution testing data could be used to gauge
the performance of the GNN proxies by estimating the corresponding
QoI prediction accuracy.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yadong Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Pranav M. Karve: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Inves-
tigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Sankaran Mahadevan:
Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding acquisition, Concep-
tualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was partly funded by the ARPA-E PERFORM program,
USA (Grant no.: DE-AR0001280, Project technical monitor: Jonathan
Glass) under subcontract to Georgia Tech (PI: Prof. Pascal Van Hen-
tenryck). The support is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also
acknowledge helpful discussions with Dr. Oliver Stover at Charles River
Associates and Dr. Ray Daniel Zimmerman at Cornell University.
Appendix A. Synthetic power grids
The Case118 power grid is one of the widely used synthetic power
grids [90], it contains 118 buses (54 generators, 99 loads and 186
branches); the Case1354pegase power grid accurately represents the
size and complexity of part of the European high voltage transmission
network, it contains 1354 buses (260 generators, 621 loads and 1991
branches). The data stems from the Pan European Grid Advanced
Simulation and State Estimation (PEGASE) project, part of the 7th
Framework Program of the European Union [91]; the Case2848rte
power grid represents the size and complexity of French (very high volt-
age) transmission network [92], it contains 2848 buses (270 generators,
1388 loads and 3776 branches). The three power grids are partitioned
into three, eight and sixteen zones, respectively, and each zone contains
a certain number of load bus, thermal generators and wind turbines.
For each zone, an aggregated value of load and wind power gen-
eration are drawn from their respective probability distributions. The
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Table A.1
Distribution parameters used for Case118 (𝜇-location parameter, 𝜎-scale parameter,
𝑘-shape parameter, 𝑎-left truncation, 𝑏-right truncation; tn: truncation Gaussian dis-
tribution, wb: Weibull distribution).
Zone Dist. Parameters
𝜇 𝑘 𝜎 𝑎 𝑏
Z1 tn 50 – 15 10 90
wb – 2 8 – –
Z2 tn 75 – 20 25 125
wb – 1.8 8.2 – –
Z3 tb 100 – 15 60 140
wb – 2.2 7.8 – –
Table A.2
Distribution parameters used for Case1354pegase (𝜇-location parameter, 𝜎-scale param-
eter, 𝑘-shape parameter, 𝑎-left truncation, 𝑏-right truncation; tn: truncation Gaussian
distribution, wb: Weibull distribution).
Zone Dist. Parameters
𝜇 𝑘 𝜎 𝑎 𝑏
Z1 tn 50 – 15 10 90
wb – 2 8 – –
Z2 tn 75 – 20 25 125
wb – 1.8 8.2 – –
Z3 tn 100 – 15 60 140
wb – 2.2 7.8 – –
Z4 tn 48 – 12 9 87
wb – 1.9 8.1 – –
Z5 tn 81 – 21 23 139
wb – 2.1 7.9 – –
Z6 tn 98 – 15 60 136
wb – 1.9 7.7 – –
Z7 tn 52 – 14 7 97
wb – 2.1 8 – –
Z8 tn 83 – 20 21 145
wb – 2.0 8.3 – –
relative contribution of each load bus/wind turbine is assumed to be a
constant in each zone. Consider zone 𝑖 containing 𝑁𝐿 load buses and
𝑁𝑊 wind turbines; then the bus-level load and wind power for zone 𝑖
are calculated as:
𝐿𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑟𝑖,𝑗 𝐿𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁𝐿
𝑃𝑖,𝑘= 𝑞𝑖,𝑘𝑃𝑖, 𝑘 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁𝑊
(A.1)
where 𝑟𝑖,𝑗 and 𝑞𝑖,𝑘 represent the distribution factor of load bus 𝑗 and
wind turbine 𝑘 to the corresponding aggregated values in zone 𝑖, while
𝐿𝑖 and 𝑃𝑖 denote the aggregated values, and 𝐿𝑖 and 𝑊𝑖 denote the
aggregated values for zone 𝑖. It is assumed that load follows truncated
normal PDF, whereas wind power generation is converted from wind
speed, which is assumed to follow Weibull PDF. The parameters used
for each probability distribution are summarized in Tables A.1–A.3.
Aggregated wind power generation is computed from wind speed
as:
𝑃 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
max (0, 𝑃𝑟
(𝑣3 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)∕ (𝑣3
𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)), 𝑣 < 𝑣𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑃𝑟
(𝑣3 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)∕ (𝑣3
𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
), 𝑣𝑚𝑖𝑛 ≤ 𝑣 ≤ 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥
min (𝑃𝑟, 𝑃𝑟
(𝑣3 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)∕ (𝑣3
𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑣3
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)), 𝑣 > 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥
(A.2)
where 𝑣𝑚𝑖𝑛 represents the minimum wind speed that can rotate wind
turbine, and 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥 denotes wind speed at which maximum power gen-
eration limits is reached. 𝑃𝑟 is the wind power generation at 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥. In
this work, 𝑣𝑚𝑖𝑛 = 1 𝑚𝑠−1, 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 15 𝑚𝑠−1 and 𝑃𝑟 = 100 𝑀 𝑊 .
Appendix B. GNN model training
See Fig. B.1.
Table A.3
Distribution parameters used for Case2848rte (𝜇-location parameter, 𝜎-scale parameter,
𝑘-shape parameter, 𝑎-left truncation, 𝑏-right truncation; tn: truncation Gaussian distri-
bution, wb: Weibull distribution).
Zone Dist. Parameters
𝜇 𝑘 𝜎 𝑎 𝑏
Z1 tn 50 – 15 10 90
wb – 2 8 – –
Z2 tn 75 – 20 25 125
wb – 1.8 8.2 – –
Z3 tn 100 – 15 60 140
wb – 2.2 7.8 – –
Z4 tn 48 – 12 9 87
wb – 1.9 8.1 – –
Z5 tn 81 – 21 23 139
wb – 2.1 7.9 – –
Z6 tn 98 – 15 60 136
wb – 1.9 7.7 – –
Z7 tn 52 – 14 7 97
wb – 2.1 8 – –
Z8 tn 83 – 20 21 145
wb – 2.0 8.3 – –
Z9 tn 45 – 12 14 76
wb – 1.8 7.8 – –
Z10 tn 85 – 18 25 145
wb – 1.8 8.1 – –
Z11 tn 98 – 16 55 141
wb – 8.1 12.5 – –
Z12 tn 53 – 13 9 97
wb – 2.2 8.5 – –
Z13 tn 84 – 20 23 139
wb – 1.8 7.5 – –
Z14 tn 98 – 15 55 141
wb – 2 7.7 – –
Z15 tn 47 – 12 8 86
wb – 2 8 – –
Z16 tn 85 – 20 21 149
wb – 2.5 8.3 – –
Fig. B.1. Training loss vs epochs for Case118.
Appendix C. Model prediction error
See Tables C.1–C.6.
Appendix D. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.124793.
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Table C.1
Mean relative error (%) of zonal/system-level thermal power generation (Case1353pegase). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing
data at each time step.
Zone Mean relative error (%)
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
S 2.46 2.54 2.98 3.05 3.11 3.04 2.30 2.38 3.02 2.50 2.52 3.12
Z1 4.14 3.75 3.37 3.96 3.69 3.82 4.03 3.65 3.69 3.87 3.84 3.46
Z2 3.24 3.95 3.66 3.50 3.69 3.44 3.49 3.80 3.73 3.49 3.57 3.43
Z3 3.53 3.11 3.55 3.77 3.10 3.68 3.36 3.73 3.75 3.73 3.54 3.61
Z4 1.25 1.03 1.12 1.11 0.64 1.32 1.23 1.39 1.07 0.99 0.90 1.16
Z5 2.66 3.21 3.52 3.47 3.45 2.92 3.28 3.10 3.23 2.84 3.18 2.62
Z6 2.33 1.94 1.80 1.97 1.80 2.55 1.92 1.74 1.75 2.39 2.47 1.67
Z7 2.18 2.95 2.57 2.98 2.64 2.83 2.48 2.88 2.44 2.41 2.48 2.45
Z8 3.32 2.85 2.85 2.89 2.90 3.14 2.66 3.20 2.73 3.44 2.61 3.28
Table C.2
Mean relative error (%) of zonal/system-level load shedding (Case1353pegase). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing data at
each time step.
Zone Mean relative error (%)
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
S 2.79 3.38 3.65 2.70 3.21 3.51 3.31 3.42 2.99 3.62 3.41 3.24
Z1 0.21 0.45 0.75 0.51 0.51 0.69 0.59 0.72 0.67 0.88 0.59 0.98
Z2 2.54 2.31 2.52 2.33 3.05 2.26 2.84 2.77 3.04 2.42 3.07 2.57
Z3 3.38 2.92 3.50 2.95 2.79 3.01 2.71 3.44 2.77 3.00 3.57 3.61
Z4 2.20 2.57 2.00 2.34 2.65 2.28 2.33 1.78 2.10 1.82 2.05 2.08
Z5 1.56 0.83 1.22 1.10 1.42 1.13 0.83 1.67 1.55 1.66 1.20 1.39
Z6 1.21 1.29 0.96 0.99 0.72 1.00 0.94 1.25 1.26 1.17 0.99 0.76
Z7 3.64 3.00 3.16 3.64 3.10 2.98 3.18 3.24 3.52 2.73 3.13 3.44
Z8 1.31 1.18 0.63 0.94 1.16 0.89 1.10 1.27 0.75 0.64 0.93 0.70
Table C.3
Mean relative error (%) of power flow on critical branches (Case1354pegase). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing data at each
time step.
Branch Mean error at each time step
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
b1 1.55 1.37 1.10 1.51 1.48 1.73 1.90 1.06 1.16 1.96 1.20 1.21
b2 1.20 1.31 1.26 0.60 1.47 0.86 1.13 0.95 0.60 1.07 1.41 0.94
b3 1.51 1.47 1.38 1.74 1.33 1.59 1.31 1.34 1.24 1.69 1.21 1.26
b4 0.62 0.82 1.16 1.06 0.41 0.27 1.03 0.51 0.58 1.06 1.05 0.74
b5 2.29 1.81 1.49 1.71 1.91 2.14 1.76 1.91 2.26 2.13 1.77 2.02
b6 1.15 1.12 0.66 1.14 1.01 0.66 0.55 1.46 0.78 0.58 0.91 0.88
b7 2.47 2.43 2.07 2.48 2.48 2.35 1.65 1.86 1.79 1.83 1.78 2.13
b8 0.40 1.29 0.38 0.88 0.42 1.04 0.47 0.55 1.26 0.66 0.67 1.16
Table C.4
Mean relative error (%) of zonal/system-level thermal power generation (Case2848rte). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing
data at each time step.
Zone Mean error at each time step
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
S 3.31 2.80 2.81 3.42 3.51 3.12 2.74 3.33 3.05 3.19 3.40 3.02
Z1 4.14 4.32 4.29 3.91 3.71 4.41 4.12 3.97 4.15 3.91 3.95 4.27
Z2 4.18 3.94 4.02 3.88 4.20 3.78 4.22 4.45 3.78 4.35 4.03 4.40
Z3 4.16 4.14 3.95 4.02 4.00 3.78 3.87 3.86 3.39 4.06 3.98 4.13
Z4 1.09 1.01 0.92 1.18 0.71 1.26 1.57 1.52 1.50 0.97 1.33 1.15
Z5 3.58 3.19 3.53 2.97 3.62 3.22 3.09 3.25 3.09 3.84 3.21 3.03
Z6 1.94 2.58 2.66 1.86 1.95 2.72 2.34 2.75 2.41 2.60 2.25 2.65
Z7 2.70 2.67 2.74 2.71 3.16 2.69 2.69 2.73 2.74 2.98 2.50 3.04
Z8 3.06 3.77 2.94 3.61 3.16 2.89 3.53 3.80 2.81 3.04 3.26 3.57
Z9 2.15 2.09 1.77 1.62 1.62 1.87 1.91 1.91 1.56 2.12 1.97 1.44
Z10 2.09 2.30 1.46 1.53 2.44 2.24 2.19 2.32 1.68 1.56 2.20 1.93
Z11 3.77 3.50 3.29 3.40 3.69 3.75 3.99 3.70 3.51 3.14 3.52 3.42
Z12 3.50 3.86 4.14 3.91 3.82 3.89 4.20 4.10 4.02 3.55 3.51 4.20
Z13 3.99 3.89 4.12 4.17 4.24 3.92 4.43 4.01 3.79 3.68 4.46 3.94
Z14 3.92 3.37 3.94 3.87 3.95 4.12 4.01 3.61 4.14 3.25 4.01 4.05
Z15 1.17 1.26 1.60 1.03 1.13 1.11 1.34 0.65 0.69 0.75 1.46 0.93
Z16 1.52 1.46 1.70 1.73 1.73 0.96 1.80 1.86 1.13 1.68 1.32 1.37
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
Table C.5
Mean relative error (%) of zonal/system-level load shedding (Case2848rte). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing data at each
time step.
Zone Mean error at each time step
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
S 3.11 3.73 3.53 3.36 2.96 3.19 3.49 3.26 3.25 3.43 3.33 3.46
Z1 1.16 1.37 1.08 1.47 0.88 0.65 0.86 0.68 1.39 0.61 1.19 1.11
Z2 3.22 2.60 3.26 2.75 3.16 2.70 3.28 2.73 2.57 2.79 2.49 3.22
Z3 2.90 3.13 3.69 3.73 3.20 3.57 3.00 3.34 3.65 3.28 3.34 2.79
Z4 2.35 2.08 2.30 2.33 2.77 2.04 2.43 2.31 2.63 2.34 2.04 2.88
Z5 1.94 2.05 1.59 1.78 1.69 1.77 1.44 1.48 1.20 1.48 1.42 1.73
Z6 1.66 1.57 1.39 1.16 2.07 1.43 1.59 2.07 1.53 1.41 1.61 1.67
Z7 3.64 2.85 3.25 3.56 3.50 3.37 2.82 3.13 3.34 3.08 3.29 3.46
Z8 1.17 1.06 1.35 1.12 1.19 1.89 1.37 1.23 1.76 1.11 1.75 1.48
Z9 1.36 0.91 0.95 1.41 0.81 1.01 1.31 0.99 1.15 1.69 1.69 1.33
Z10 3.09 2.57 3.53 3.13 3.35 3.12 3.43 3.14 3.26 2.70 2.98 3.25
Z11 3.46 3.80 3.53 3.87 4.18 3.45 4.16 3.93 3.95 3.56 3.80 3.66
Z12 0.55 0.54 0.96 1.26 1.07 0.90 0.68 1.35 1.11 1.29 1.36 1.12
Z13 2.82 2.65 2.06 2.79 2.21 2.50 2.55 2.52 2.88 2.21 2.05 2.89
Z14 3.68 3.39 3.35 3.05 3.28 3.03 3.65 3.01 3.14 3.51 3.23 3.59
Z15 3.14 2.69 2.43 3.15 3.12 2.73 3.20 2.72 2.59 3.17 3.07 2.85
Z16 3.31 2.88 3.56 3.63 2.98 3.53 2.98 2.69 2.71 2.85 2.73 2.92
Table C.6
Mean relative error (%) of power flow on critical branches (Case2848rte). It is computed as the average of prediction error over all testing data at each
time step.
Branch Mean error at each time step
𝑡1 𝑡2 𝑡3 𝑡4 𝑡5 𝑡6 𝑡7 𝑡8 𝑡9 𝑡10 𝑡11 𝑡12
b1 2.17 1.53 2.17 1.63 1.79 2.30 2.18 1.69 1.53 1.73 1.36 1.61
b2 1.49 0.71 1.29 1.30 0.80 1.08 0.73 1.59 1.68 0.76 1.59 1.27
b3 1.80 1.69 1.64 1.08 1.27 1.61 1.83 1.31 1.35 1.91 2.04 1.95
b4 2.47 2.71 2.47 2.45 2.29 2.35 2.16 2.62 2.49 2.70 2.74 2.25
b5 0.95 0.96 0.61 0.40 0.37 0.22 0.29 0.26 0.19 0.98 0.97 0.61
b6 1.04 0.64 0.40 0.77 0.81 0.39 0.83 1.30 0.70 0.64 1.11 1.06
b7 1.99 2.31 2.22 1.97 1.79 1.99 2.13 2.34 1.93 2.32 1.88 2.33
b8 2.84 2.84 2.67 2.37 2.76 2.92 2.69 3.05 3.04 2.23 2.09 2.23
b9 1.27 1.30 0.55 0.70 0.89 0.61 0.80 1.04 0.84 1.06 0.87 0.34
b10 1.83 1.93 1.84 1.79 1.94 1.88 1.53 1.71 2.38 1.46 1.48 1.72
b11 2.81 3.22 3.22 3.22 2.34 2.89 2.75 2.40 3.17 2.47 3.23 2.81
b12 0.71 0.91 0.71 0.93 1.12 1.24 1.01 0.83 1.10 0.96 0.88 0.84
b13 0.67 0.91 0.96 1.36 1.19 1.23 0.84 0.81 1.12 1.17 0.58 0.60
b14 0.73 0.43 1.23 1.11 0.79 0.49 0.41 1.25 0.98 1.13 0.66 0.52
b15 0.85 1.41 1.02 1.21 1.35 0.80 0.63 1.28 1.51 1.50 1.04 1.18
b16 3.18 3.35 2.61 2.85 2.86 3.14 2.87 3.30 3.29 2.52 2.75 3.43
Data availability
All data and code used in this work can be downloaded at: https:
//github.com/yadong-zhang/GNN_SCUC.
References
[1] Mittelman G, Eran R, Zhivin L, Eisenhändler O, Luzon Y, Tshuva M. The potential
of renewable electricity in isolated grids: The case of Israel in 2050. Appl Energy
2023;349:121325.
[2] Shang Y, Liu M, Shao Z, Jian L. Internet of smart charging points with
photovoltaic integration: A high-efficiency scheme enabling optimal dispatching
between electric vehicles and power grids. Appl Energy 2020;278:115640.
[3] Lee ZJ, Pang JZ, Low SH. Pricing EV charging service with demand charge.
Electr Power Syst Res 2020;189:106694.
[4] Wang W, Sun B, Li H, Sun Q, Wennersten R. An improved min-max power
dispatching method for integration of variable renewable energy. Appl Energy
2020;276:115430.
[5] Li J, Zhou J, Chen B. Review of wind power scenario generation methods for
optimal operation of renewable energy systems. Appl Energy 2020;280:115992.
[6] Matsuo Y, Endo S, Nagatomi Y, Shibata Y, Komiyama R, Fujii Y. Investigating
the economics of the power sector under high penetration of variable renewable
energies. Appl Energy 2020;267:113956.
[7] Ding Y, Morstyn T, McCulloch MD. Distributionally robust joint chance-
constrained optimization for networked microgrids considering contingencies and
renewable uncertainty. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2022;13(3):2467–78.
[8] Hlalele TG, Naidoo RM, Bansal RC, Zhang J. Multi-objective stochastic economic
dispatch with maximal renewable penetration under renewable obligation. Appl
Energy 2020;270:115120.
[9] Ponciroli R, Stauff NE, Ramsey J, Ganda F, Vilim RB. An improved genetic
algorithm approach to the unit commitment/economic dispatch problem. IEEE
Trans Power Syst 2020;35(5):4005–13.
[10] Lagos DT, Hatziargyriou ND. Data-driven frequency dynamic unit commit-
ment for island systems with high RES penetration. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2021;36(5):4699–711.
[11] Jiang S, Gao S, Pan G, Liu Y, Wu C, Wang S. Congestion-aware robust
security constrained unit commitment model for AC-DC grids. Appl Energy
2021;304:117392.
[12] Psarros GN, Dratsas PA, Papathanassiou SA. A comparison between central-
and self-dispatch storage management principles in island systems. Appl Energy
2021;298:117181.
[13] Moretti L, Martelli E, Manzolini G. An efficient robust optimization model for
the unit commitment and dispatch of multi-energy systems and microgrids. Appl
Energy 2020;261:113859.
[14] Isuru M, Hotz M, Gooi H, Utschick W. Network-constrained thermal unit com-
mitment for hybrid AC/DC transmission grids under wind power uncertainty.
Appl Energy 2020;258:114031.
[15] Sedzro KSA, Kishore S, Lamadrid AJ, Zuluaga LF. Stochastic risk-sensitive market
integration for renewable energy: Application to ocean wave power plants. Appl
Energy 2018;229:474–81.
[16] Mohseni-Bonab SM, Kamwa I, Rabiee A, Chung C. Stochastic optimal trans-
mission Switching: A novel approach to enhance power grid security margins
through vulnerability mitigation under renewables uncertainties. Appl Energy
2022;305:117851.
[17] Adefarati T, Bansal R. Reliability and economic assessment of a microgrid
power system with the integration of renewable energy resources. Appl Energy
2017;206:911–33.
[18] Stover O, Karve P, Mahadevan S. Reliability and risk metrics to assess operational
adequacy and flexibility of power grids. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023;231:109018.
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
[19] Castelli AF, Pilotti L, Monchieri A, Martelli E. Optimal design of aggregated en-
ergy systems with (N-1) reliability: MILP models and decomposition algorithms.
Appl Energy 2024;356:122002.
[20] Juanpera M, Ferrer-Martí L, Pastor R. Multi-stage optimization of rural electri-
fication planning at regional level considering multiple criteria. Case study in
Nigeria. Appl Energy 2022;314:118926.
[21] Lyu C, Jia Y, Xu Z. A novel communication-less approach to economic dispatch
for microgrids. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2020;12(1):901–4.
[22] Samsatli S, Samsatli NJ. A multi-objective MILP model for the design and
operation of future integrated multi-vector energy networks capturing detailed
spatio-temporal dependencies. Appl Energy 2018;220:893–920.
[23] Cao Y, Wei W, Mei S, Shafie-Khah M, Catalao JP. Analyzing and quantifying the
intrinsic distributional robustness of cvar reformulation for chance-constrained
stochastic programs. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2020;35(6):4908–11.
[24] Rayati M, Bozorg M, Cherkaoui R, Carpita M. Distributionally robust chance con-
strained optimization for providing flexibility in an active distribution network.
IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2022;13(4):2920–34.
[25] Cao X, Wang J, Zeng B. Networked microgrids planning through chance con-
strained stochastic conic programming. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2019;10(6):6619–
28.
[26] Gu N, Wang H, Zhang J, Wu C. Bridging chance-constrained and robust
optimization in an emission-aware economic dispatch with energy storage. IEEE
Trans Power Syst 2021;37(2):1078–90.
[27] Kirilenko A, Gong Y, Chung C. A framework for power system operational
planning under uncertainty using coherent risk measures. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2021;36(5):4376–86.
[28] Ghorani R, Pourahmadi F, Moeini-Aghtaie M, Fotuhi-Firuzabad M, Shahideh-
pour M. Risk-based networked-constrained unit commitment considering corre-
lated power system uncertainties. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2019;11(2):1781–91.
[29] Xu Y, Mili L, Sandu A, von Spakovsky MR, Zhao J. Propagating uncertainty in
power system dynamic simulations using polynomial chaos. IEEE Trans Power
Syst 2018;34(1):338–48.
[30] Gao H, Lyu X, He S, Wang L, Wang C, Liu J. Integrated planning of cyber-
physical active distribution system considering multidimensional uncertainties.
IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2022;13(4):3145–59.
[31] Xu J, Chen Y, Liao S, Sun Y, Yao L, Fu H, et al. Demand side industrial
load control for local utilization of wind power in isolated grids. Appl Energy
2019;243:47–56.
[32] Liu J, Zhang Y, Meng K, Dong ZY, Xu Y, Han S. Real-time emergency load
shedding for power system transient stability control: A risk-averse deep learning
method. Appl Energy 2022;307:118221.
[33] Luo N, Langevin J, Chandra-Putra H, Lee SH. Quantifying the effect of multiple
load flexibility strategies on commercial building electricity demand and services
via surrogate modeling. Appl Energy 2022;309:118372.
[34] Wang Q, Miao C, Tang Y. Power shortage support strategies considering
unified gas-thermal inertia in an integrated energy system. Appl Energy
2022;328:120229.
[35] Li B, Feng C, Siebenschuh C, Zhang R, Spyrou E, Krishnan V, et al. Sizing ramping
reserve using probabilistic solar forecasts: A data-driven method. Appl Energy
2022;313:118812.
[36] Mohan V, Singh JG, Ongsakul W. An efficient two stage stochastic optimal energy
and reserve management in a microgrid. Appl Energy 2015;160:28–38.
[37] Heleno M, Matos MA, Lopes JP. Availability and flexibility of loads for the
provision of reserve. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2014;6(2):667–74.
[38] Morales-España G, Baldick R, García-González J, Ramos A. Power-capacity and
ramp-capability reserves for wind integration in power-based UC. IEEE Trans
Sustain Energy 2015;7(2):614–24.
[39] Gong Y, Jiang Q, Baldick R. Ramp event forecast based wind power ramp control
with energy storage system. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2015;31(3):1831–44.
[40] Dolanyi M, Bruninx K, Toubeau J-F, Delarue E. Risk-based constraints for
the optimal operation of an energy community. IEEE Trans Smart Grid
2022;13(6):4551–61.
[41] Ryu Y, Lee H-W. A real-time framework for matching prosumers with minimum
risk in the cluster of microgrids. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2020;11(4):2832–44.
[42] Nikkhah S, Sarantakos I, Zografou-Barredo N-M, Rabiee A, Allahham A,
Giaouris D. A joint risk-and security-constrained control framework for real-
time energy scheduling of islanded microgrids. IEEE Trans Smart Grid
2022;13(5):3354–68.
[43] Neyestani N, Yazdani-Damavandi M, Shafie-Khah M, Chicco G, Catalão JP.
Stochastic modeling of multienergy carriers dependencies in smart local networks
with distributed energy resources. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2015;6(4):1748–62.
[44] Lee XY, Sarkar S, Wang Y. A graph policy network approach for volt-var control
in power distribution systems. Appl Energy 2022;323:119530.
[45] Lu J, Zhang C, Li J, Zhao Y, Qiu W, Li T, et al. Graph convolutional networks-
based method for estimating design loads of complex buildings in the preliminary
design stage. Appl Energy 2022;322:119478.
[46] Liu M, Gao H, Ji S. Towards deeper graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of
the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data
mining. 2020, p. 338–48.
[47] Feng J, Chen Y, Li F, Sarkar A, Zhang M. How powerful are k-hop message
passing graph neural networks. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2022;35:4776–90.
[48] Liu Z, Zhou J. Introduction to graph neural networks. Springer Nature; 2022.
[49] Fan W, Ma Y, Li Q, He Y, Zhao E, Tang J, et al. Graph neural networks for
social recommendation. In: The world wide web conference. 2019, p. 417–26.
[50] Min S, Gao Z, Peng J, Wang L, Qin K, Fang B. STGSN—A spatial–temporal graph
neural network framework for time-evolving social networks. Knowl-Based Syst
2021;214:106746.
[51] Zhang Z, Zhuang F, Zhu H, Shi Z, Xiong H, He Q. Relational graph neu-
ral network with hierarchical attention for knowledge graph completion. In:
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 34, 2020, p.
9612–9.
[52] Jacob RA, Senemmar S, Zhang J. Fault diagnostics in shipboard power systems
using graph neural networks. In: 2021 IEEE 13th international symposium on
diagnostics for electrical machines, power electronics and drives. SDEMPED, Vol.
1, IEEE; 2021, p. 316–21.
[53] Owerko D, Gama F, Ribeiro A. Predicting power outages using graph neural
networks. In: 2018 ieee global conference on signal and information processing
(globalsip). IEEE; 2018, p. 743–7.
[54] Donon B, Clément R, Donnot B, Marot A, Guyon I, Schoenauer M. Neu-
ral networks for power flow: Graph neural solver. Electr Power Syst Res
2020;189:106547.
[55] Wu D, Lin W. Efficient residential electric load forecasting via transfer learning
and graph neural networks. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2022;14(3):2423–31.
[56] Kundacina O, Gojic G, Cosovic M, Miskovic D, Vukobratovic D. Scalability and
sample efficiency analysis of graph neural networks for power system state
estimation. In: 2023 international balkan conference on communications and
networking (balkanCom). IEEE; 2023, p. 1–6.
[57] Kundacina O, Cosovic M, Vukobratovic D. State estimation in electric power
systems leveraging graph neural networks. In: 2022 17th international conference
on probabilistic methods applied to power systems. PMAPS, IEEE; 2022, p. 1–6.
[58] Moshtagh S, Sifat AI, Azimian B, Pal A. Time-synchronized state estimation using
graph neural networks in presence of topology changes. In: 2023 North American
power symposium. NAPS, IEEE; 2023, p. 1–6.
[59] Falconer T, Mones L. Leveraging power grid topology in machine learning
assisted optimal power flow. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2022;38(3):2234–46.
[60] Diehl F. Warm-starting AC optimal power flow with graph neural networks. In:
33rd conference on neural information processing systems (NeurIPS 2019). 2019,
p. 1–6.
[61] Chen Y, Wang Q, Wang X, Guan Y. Applying robust optimization to MISO look-
ahead commitment. In: 2014 IEEE PES general meeting| conference & exposition.
IEEE; 2014, p. 1–5.
[62] Zhou Y, Shahidehpour M, Wei Z, Sun G, Chen S. Multistage robust look-ahead
unit commitment with probabilistic forecasting in multi-carrier energy systems.
IEEE Trans Sustain Energy 2020;12(1):70–82.
[63] Park S, Chen W, Han D, Tanneau M, Van Hentenryck P. Confidence-aware graph
neural networks for learning reliability assessment commitments. IEEE Trans
Power Syst 2023.
[64] Chen Y, Savageau D, Wang F, Casto A. Voltage and local reliability commitment
under electricity market operations. In: 2016 IEEE power and energy society
general meeting. PESGM, IEEE; 2016, p. 1–5.
[65] Goleijani S, Ghanbarzadeh T, Nikoo FS, Moghaddam MP. Reliability con-
strained unit commitment in smart grid environment. Electr Power Syst Res
2013;97:100–8.
[66] Billinton R, Fotuhi-Firuzabad M. A reliability framework for generating unit
commitment. Electr Power Syst Res 2000;56(1):81–8.
[67] Xavier AS, Qiu F, Wang F, Thimmapuram PR. Transmission constraint filtering
in large-scale security-constrained unit commitment. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2019;34(3):2457–60.
[68] Šepetanc K, Pandžić H. Convex polar second-order taylor approximation
of AC power flows: A unit commitment study. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2020;36(4):3585–94.
[69] Yang N, Dong Z, Wu L, Zhang L, Shen X, Chen D, et al. A comprehensive
review of security-constrained unit commitment. J Mod Power Syst Clean Energy
2021;10(3):562–76.
[70] Tang Z, Hill DJ, Liu T. A novel consensus-based economic dispatch for
microgrids. IEEE Trans Smart Grid 2018;9(4):3920–2.
[71] Shafie-Khah M, Moghaddam MP, Sheikh-El-Eslami M. Unified solution of a non-
convex SCUC problem using combination of modified branch-and-bound method
with quadratic programming. Energy Convers Manage 2011;52(12):3425–32.
[72] Jiang Q, Zhou B, Zhang M. Parallel augment Lagrangian relaxation method
for transient stability constrained unit commitment. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2012;28(2):1140–8.
[73] Laothumyingyong N, Damrongkulkamjorn P. Security-constrained unit com-
mitment using mixed-integer programming with benders decomposition. In:
ECTI-CON2010: the 2010 ECTI international confernce on electrical engi-
neering/electronics, computer, telecommunications and information technology.
IEEE; 2010, p. 626–30.
[74] Yang Y, Wu L. Machine learning approaches to the unit commitment
problem: Current trends, emerging challenges, and new strategies. Electr J
2021;34(1):106889.
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
Y. Zhang et al.
[75] Yang N, Yang C, Xing C, Ye D, Jia J, Chen D, et al. Deep learning-based
SCUC decision-making: An intelligent data-driven approach with self-learning
capabilities. IET Gener Transm Distribution 2022;16(4):629–40.
[76] Ramesh AV, Li X. Feasibility layer aided machine learning approach for
day-ahead operations. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2023.
[77] Ramesh AV, Li X. Spatio-temporal deep learning-assisted reduced security-
constrained unit commitment. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2023.
[78] Mohammadi F, Sahraei-Ardakani M, Trakas DN, Hatziargyriou ND. Machine
learning assisted stochastic unit commitment during hurricanes with predictable
line outages. IEEE Trans Power Syst 2021;36(6):5131–42.
[79] Hasan F, Kargarian A. Topology-aware learning assisted branch and ramp
constraints screening for dynamic economic dispatch. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2022;37(5):3495–505.
[80] Ramesh AV, Li X. Machine learning assisted model reduction for security-
constrained unit commitment. In: 2022 North American power symposium.
NAPS, IEEE; 2022, p. 1–6.
[81] Schmitt S, Harjunkoski I, Giuntoli M, Poland J, Feng X. Fast solution of unit
commitment using machine learning approaches. In: 2022 IEEE 7th international
energy conference. ENERGYCON, IEEE; 2022, p. 1–6.
[82] Zhou J, Cui G, Hu S, Zhang Z, Yang C, Liu Z, et al. Graph neural networks: A
review of methods and applications. AI Open 2020;1:57–81.
[83] Wu Z, Pan S, Chen F, Long G, Zhang C, Philip SY. A comprehensive survey on
graph neural networks. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 2020;32(1):4–24.
[84] Kipf TN, Welling M. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
networks. In: International conference on learning representations. 2022.
[85] Sapountzoglou N, Lago J, De Schutter B, Raison B. A generalizable and sensor-
independent deep learning method for fault detection and location in low-voltage
distribution grids. Appl Energy 2020;276:115299.
[86] Benmahamed Y, Teguar M, Boubakeur A. Application of SVM and KNN to
duval pentagon 1 for transformer oil diagnosis. IEEE Trans Dielectr Electr Insul
2017;24(6):3443–51.
[87] Hamilton W, Ying Z, Leskovec J. Inductive representation learning on large
graphs. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017;30.
[88] Nauck C, Lindner M, Schürholt K, Hellmann F. Toward dynamic stability
assessment of power grid topologies using graph neural networks. Chaos
2023;33(10).
[89] Ringsquandl M, Sellami H, Hildebrandt M, Beyer D, Henselmeyer S, Weber S, et
al. Power to the relational inductive bias: Graph neural networks in electrical
power grids. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on
information & knowledge management. 2021, p. 1538–47.
[90] Zimmerman RD, Murillo-Sánchez CE, Gan D. MATPOWER: A MATLAB power sys-
tem simulation package. Vol. 1, Ithaca NY: Manual, Power Systems Engineering
Research Center; 1997, p. 10–7.
[91] Fliscounakis S, Panciatici P, Capitanescu F, Wehenkel L. Contingency rank-
ing with respect to overloads in very large power systems taking into
account uncertainty, preventive, and corrective actions. IEEE Trans Power Syst
2013;28(4):4909–17.
[92] Josz C, Fliscounakis S, Maeght J, Panciatici P. AC power flow data in MAT-
POWER and QCQP format: iTesla, RTE snapshots, and PEGASE. 2016, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.01533.
[93] Chatzos M, Tanneau M, Van Hentenryck P. Data-driven time series reconstruction
for modern power systems research. Electr Power Syst Res 2022;212:108589.
[94] Gurobi Optimization L. Gurobi optimizer reference manual. 2021.
[95] Paszke A, Gross S, Massa F, Lerer A, Bradbury J, Chanan G, et al. Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Adv Neural Inf Process
Syst 2019;32.
[96] Fey M, Lenssen JE. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric.
In: ICLR workshop on representation learning on graphs and manifolds. 2019.
[97] Liaw R, Liang E, Nishihara R, Moritz P, Gonzalez JE, Stoica I. Tune: A research
platform for distributed model selection and training. 2018, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.05118.
Applied Energy 380 (2025) 124793 
18 
